# DSP-577-Capstone---Jenkins-Lozada-Russo
Github Repository for all Capstone Project related items for Jenkins, Lozada and Russo

# Data Driven Decision Making in College Admissions

The purpose of this study is to gather various levels of undergraduate application information within three categories - biographical, demographical, and academic - in order to reveal patterns in a list of more than 12,000 applicants. The information that we hope to gain from our models should present an understanding of the factors that drive a student to commit to a college, specifically a four-year public university in Rhode Island. A university is a business that sells a service, and it must approach their market in a way that is effective both to the prospective student and to the university itself. All campaigning efforts are wasted if they are not reaching the right market. This study aims to determine the most fitting market for a four year public university in Rhode Island in order to best serve its mission and strategy, so that the target student and university alike are poised for success.
 
## Methodologies

With this study, we aim to understand the underlying variables that predict whether a first-year or transfer student may elect to attend a four-year public university in Rhode Island. 20 predictors will be analyzed to yield a comprehensive understanding of the strength of correlation between different predictors that determine a student’s decision. The steps and processes described in this section cover the methodologies that will be used to build a machine learning model.
The data will consist of demographic information such as gender, age and location, and enrollment data such as their selected major and entry term. Census Bureau data will also be gathered and will consist of mean household income and educational attainment broken out by ZIP code. To prepare this data cleaning and preprocessing will be required. Three CSV files will have to be joined together using ZIP code as the key between the tables. Features with insufficient data will be excluded, and rows with missing data will be removed from the combined table. Some of the features will require one-hot encoding. Additionally, the data will be split into a training and testing set, and the numerical features will be normalized.  
Through an exploratory analysis the class balance of the target will be reviewed, and the correlation between the predictors and target will each be measured against a correlation threshold. Unnecessary features with low correlation will be dropped from the dataset thereby improving efficiency. The model will be trained for binary classification, and there are many different machine learning algorithms which can be used. In order to effectively train and test the different combinations and identify the best possible model, Grid Search and K Fold Cross Validation will be used. Through this process the best performing model will be selected. 

## Possible outcomes 
After the model is trained and tested we will examine its accuracy. In binary classification problems it is important for models to be highly accurate in predicting both true positives and true negatives. The model may be able to predict one but not the other. This may indicate an underlying imbalance in the data, or other drivers that are not being fully captured. This model will be trained and tested with the intent of maximizing all measures of predictive accuracy. 

## Implications and Ethical Concerns
This project has the potential to change how universities conduct their recruiting based on which types of students are identified to be more likely to attend. Conversely, the schools may reduce their recruiting efforts towards students or areas which they identify as less likely to attend. By extension, this could also affect how financial aid or scholarships are awarded. This is because schools would be more likely to offer financial aid/scholarship packages to those students who they believe are more likely to attend or are leaning towards attending. With all these things in mind, it is important to note that this will only be targeting recruitment of students and not any admission decisions. This goal is to market to students who are likely to attend the college, not only to admit those who are identified as most likely to attend. Admissions will not be involved with recruitment and will make their own independent decisions. We also want to make sure that our model is operating fairly and not excluding or misidentifying certain groups that may have gone to our college if recruited. We want to make sure that this project helps both students and colleges find one another without leaving anyone behind.

## Conclusion
Using machine learning models, our objective in this project will be to determine the factors that indicate a student will or will not attend a four year public university in Rhode Island. By doing this we hope to provide a resource to better pair universities and students together. This ensures that universities are spending their resources appropriately and students are getting exposed to the institutions that would most align with their interests. While the decision to attend university is a complex one, we hope to shine some light on what drives these decisions as millions of students make this life altering decision year after year.

